so next Thursday is the second midterm
exam who could have thought it feels
like the first one was just yesterday
yeah it was much warmer you know so next
Thursday November 5th right here for
most students as you know last time we
had an overflow and again I apologize
for this apologize to those students who
didn't have a comfortable seat so we'll
avoid this situation this kind of
situation this time we'll have some
breathing room and unfortunately that
means that two sections students from
two sections those which are led by
Dario will will meet at a different
undisclosed location now I just didn't
want to write it you can find it all
data will tell you if you are in the
other section that it will tell you and
it's also on on the class homepage
it's an embarrassed and if you're not in
section by of Dario then you don't need
to worry about it you should just come
here okay and they will own on the home
on the home page you will find more
information but it's basically the same
the same deal someone asked me for the
for the cheat sheet for the you know
page of formulas can we can we use the
the old one the one from the first
midterm the answer is no you have to
make a new one it will also be on once
one side it has to be one side it on one
side of standard size sheet of paper
okay but don't worry we're not going to
test you on the material the first
midterm anyway so it doesn't really it
doesn't make a difference the midterm
will cover the material between after
the first midterm okay everything that
we've done up to now since the first
midterm up to now up to this week
including this week and there are on
this web page you will find problems for
review and you will also find a mock a
mock midterm it's not posted yet I will
post it tonight the mock midterm okay
any questions about this about the exam
next Tuesday we'll have a review review
lecture as before in which I will
discuss all this material and kind of
try to put it in perspective and you
will have a chance to ask me questions
about it also yes oh so there will be no
quiz next week so it's the same deal as
as last time
the mock midterm the idea is to give you
problems which kind of look similar to
what you should expect of course yes
well difficulties in eyes of the culture
of the beholder right so for some people
it will be more difficult than people
the less difficult but it should be in
the same ballpark okay all right
so let's go back to let's go back to the
material of last week I mean last week
last Tuesday we talked about triple
integrals and we talked about special
coordinate systems for triple integrals
the cylindrical and spherical coordinate
systems okay so I want to say I want to
say a few words
general general words about triple
integrals so when I say triple integral
it means that we we have something like
this where e is the region in
three-dimensional space something we
denote by r3 f is a function and VV is
what we can think of it's kind of a
measure of integration which we would
usually write as DX dy DZ but and in
some order but in fact we know that you
can use other coordinates as well and
today we'll talk more about the
possibility of using different scores
so the basic setup for calculating this
integral is as I already explained last
time and as has been explained last week
but I want to repeat it one more time is
that you want to represent this triple
integral as an iterated integral in
other words you all you want to break it
into steps where at each step you are
just evaluating a single integral an
integral in one variable
something which we learned before in one
variable calculus and the way you do it
is first of all you find you find the
projection of your three-dimensional
region so you have some
three-dimensional region here but the
first thing you do is you find its
projection on one of the planes one of
the coordinate planes let's say XY plane
but it could be X Z or Y Z play so
that's the projection D let's call it D
so this e is three dimensional
this is three dimensional whereas D is
two dimensional it's a two dimensional
region which is in the XY plane okay so
once you do that you can rewrite your
integral as a network as a kind of an
iterated to integral where you have a
double integral over D and here you put
da which is the measure of integration
in the two dimensional space which is
essentially DX dy and then you have an
integral of f with respect to the
remaining variable where you have to put
the limits so there will be some limits
alpha and beta which in general will
depend on XY
so here XY will be in indeed and for
each XY the limits for this single
integral will be from some alpha vex Y 2
beta that's why now the the way we write
it is slightly confusing and you saw
that confusion last time at the lecture
when we discussed it it is important to
remember that you read the integral from
right to left I mean that's the way
that's the way it's done it's a
convention you read it from right to
left which means that you first do this
one you first this is the first step you
first evaluate this single integral ok
and then in the second step you evaluate
the resulting double integral so once
you evaluate this you will get something
which will depend on X on x and y this
will be an expression depending on x and
y which you then integrate over d in the
XY plane so we break it into two steps
the first step is a single integral with
respect to the remaining variable along
which you have projected and the second
step is integrating over the image of
the projection which is d this is the
image of the projection ok so we can
actually write it further further in the
combination of single integrals because
this double integral in turn can also be
written as is an iterated integral ok so
the that means that writing integral
over d
BA as an iterated integral with respect
to X and y we actually end up with three
single integrals so here we also have a
choice there is a choice which one goes
first X or Y okay let's say and what do
you mean by which goes first which you
which one will appear first or which one
you will integrate first as I just said
you read it from right to left so this
is actually the roles are reversed right
so let's write it like this let's say if
DX and then it will be dy and then
finally it is DZ and then you have your
function f here I wrote F DZ and here I
wrote DZ f it doesn't really matter as
we discussed last time doesn't matter
which order you write F and D Z or F and
dy and so on
I find this form a little bit more
convenient to remember more intuitive
because the variable of integration is
written right next to the integrals so
you will not forget which one you're
integrating but the important thing to
remember when you look at this formula
is to read it from right to left you
read it from right to left which means
that this is the first step integrate
over Z I'm skipping the limits of course
there will be limits for example here
will be limits alpha of X Y and weight
of XY like on that blackboard but let me
just keep that I'm just giving you kind
of schematics of this process okay so
the first step is integrating F over Z
the result will be a function which only
depends on X and y because we have
integrated Algie
think of it as kind of removing the
dependence on Z by averaging out over
the over the effect of Z the result is a
function of x and y that function you
integrate over Y this is step number two
this is the second step and finally you
integrate the result which will now be
only function of x over x so that the
end result is actually a number
independent of all of the three
variables
so at each of the steps you get rid of
one of the variables you're kind of
averaging out over the over that
variable so that the result is not does
not depend on that variable if you are
doing an integral and suddenly you
notice that you have integrated over Z
about the result somehow depends on Z
that you carry Z somehow to the second
or first or third step you may have you
have made a mistake somewhere there
should not be any dependence on Z on a
second step there should not be any
dependence on XY energy at the third
step is he so this is an important as to
see if you're doing things in the right
way okay any questions about this so so
it's a kind of a notational issue but
you just have to them you have to
remember that you kind of this is
because it is actually it is very it
makes sense because you're integrating
this expression okay by what is this
expression this expression obtained by
integrating this I mean integrating
respect to Y this expression so
unraveling it you see that first you
have to integrate this and you integrate
this and then you have to read this it
makes perfect sense that you go from
right to left and not from left to right
okay now there is a very special case
over all the triple integral
there is a special case and that's the
case when the function f which in
general is just any function of X Y and
V right so f is really f of X Y Z and
general can be anything could be you
know x squared times e to the Y times
cosine Z or whatever whatever you want
but there is a special case when this
function is actually just equal to 1
okay that's a simple function you can
imagine well say it's 0 perhaps but if
the function is 0 this integral is 0 so
there is nothing to discuss let's talk
about the case when the function is
actually equal to 1 and also let's
assume in addition that our region in
the three dimensional space e is the
region above above this domain the
domain D in in the two dimensional space
under the graph of some function of a
function let's call this function f
capital note that this has nothing to do
with f small f small the function of
three variables it's a function on e
which is the region in 3d on r3 on the
three-dimensional space but let's
suppose that the region itself is a
written function so that let's let's
draw a picture like this so let's say D
is a kind of rectangular region and here
we have we have some function like this
so we have some
this is a graph of a function okay so
let's say that this is a graph of a
function Z equals F capital of X Y so
this is what we discussed when we talked
about double integrals when we talked
about double integrals we discussed the
fact that a double integral represents
the volume under the graph the volume
under the graph so the volume under the
graph I put it in quotations what I mean
is first of all that I'm assuming that
this function is greater than or equal
to 0 or owned on d4 otherwise it would
not be above the XY plane everywhere on
on the on this region D this is the
region which is now kind of a
rectangular region I have chosen to
simplify things
ok and also when I say under the graph I
really mean under the graph but above
the XY plane and also on the sides it's
confined by the boundaries of D which in
this case are just vertical planes like
this ok so when we talked about double
integrals we discussed the fact that
volume is equal to this volume under the
graph is equal to the double integral
over D of F capital XY da right so now I
want to show I want to show that you get
exactly this answer if you also by
calculating a triple integral but with
the function 1 you see so this is one of
the points which many people find
confusing that the volume under the
graph is actually given by a double
integral but it's also given by a triple
integral but in the special case in
special cases that the function which
you integrate function three variables
is one in other words what I'm
integrating now is
Givi you see this is the most general
triple integral the integral of F DV
over e but now f with one so if you want
I can put one times DV but it doesn't
matter I can one times DV is DV okay so
what is it equal to let's use this
formula first of all so I project onto D
and in this case I surely can do that
because my region has a very nice
projection on to the XY plane discipline
because it's it's it's under the graph
of a function and so I will have here da
and then I will have to put the limit
here alpha and beta and integrate my
function but what are the limits in this
situation in this situation the limit
the lower limit is always zero I will
always counting Z from zero because my
bottom the bottom lid of this of this
region is just a rectangle on the XY
plane so that means EB is equal to zero
at the bottom here Z is equal to zero
across the bottom so that's why here I
actually put zero and then I'm
integrating thee from zero to something
which lies on the graph so that's the
sort of the top of this region right and
so for the top point of that region what
is Z equal to Z is equal to F capital of
X Y right so that means that my upper
limit is F capital F of XY and then I
have to put f DZ f GD but F is 1 again
so it's 1 times DZ
so this is very easy to find right this
is just a very special case of the
general setup I have to take the
antiderivative to calculate this
integral I simply have to take the
antiderivative of one an antiderivative
one is Z plus a constant but anyway we
are going to take the difference of the
limit so it's going to be Z with the
limit F of XY and 0 so what is that
that's just f of X Y so this inner
integral which as we have agreed should
represent the first step of the
calculation this inner integral
it's simply equal to f of XY right
simply because the function is 1 this
argument would not work necessarily for
a general function for general function
will have some F here which depends on
XY right and so X Y Z in fact so in a
general function it depends on X Y Z so
you wouldn't be able to easily find the
antiderivative but for the function one
that the roots can see I mean this for
sure we know right so that's the answer
we get and once we get this answer let's
substitute it here so we get double
integral of F capital of XY da so that's
the same answer the same answer as
before right the answer before was the
integral of f of XY da over D and that's
exactly what we got by integrating the
function 1 over this entire
three-dimensional region ok
this makes sense yeah any questions
about this so so the conclusion is that
this integral is actually equal to the
triple integral over e where e is this
region inside this is e is the
three-dimensional
region which is drawn here under the
graph so one more time the volume of
this region under the graph can be
represented in two ways one is triple
integral but a very special function
namely function one ok and can also be
represent as a double integral of the
function f capital of which this is the
graph over the region D the reason why
the two things are the same just is just
it's the result of calculation of
representing this triple integral as an
iterated integral where at the first
step we very easily evaluate what the
result is for this function for the
special function 1 that's what we get ok
so now of course you can ask if if the
integral of the function 1 over the
three-dimensional region is nothing but
the volume of that region what about the
general case what about an integral of a
general function f of XY Z is this also
some sort of a volume well there are two
two ways to interpret the triple
integral for a general function for a
general function function f of X Y Z not
necessarily one not one but some general
function there are two ways to interpret
two ways to interpret the integral well
first the first way is let's suppose you
want to interpret it as some sort of a
volume and let's argue let's argue by
analogy okay suppose we have let's go
down one dimension lower and let's look
at the integral or disc of this function
over the two-dimensional region double
integral this is a double integral but
we interpreted it as the volume of
of something three-dimensional you see
so a double integral of a general
function actually corresponds to volume
of something 3-dimensional of dimension
greater by one so you start with a
double integral but you get a volume of
something three-dimensional that's not
surprising because likewise if you have
an integral a single integral of a
function one variable right what does
this represent it represents the area of
something two-dimensional namely the
area under the graph of this function f
let's call it let's choose a different
very function notation for this function
so that we don't confuse the different
things right so a single integral
corresponds to the volume but in this
case we call volume area that's how
that's the terminology proper
terminology area of something under the
graph of this function and this
something is actually two-dimensional
even though you start with a single
integral v if you start with a double
integral so 2 is the number of
integrations you get volume of something
three-dimensional right so what will you
get if you take a triple integral you
get a sort of a hyper volume of
something four dimensional right so mean
that if you insist on interpreting the
integral as a volume of sorts you have
to go to - you have to introduce one
extra dimension and so you will get kind
of hyper volume I don't know there is no
there is no good term for it I am
mathematicians we'll just call it a
volume because you don't care what the
dimension is to worry to call it a
volume but let's call it hyperbole
implants besides that it is a volume of
something not quite it's not quite quite
kind of an object that we will meet in
real life hyper volume of a four
dimensional region
region which is the region under the
graph under the graph again quotation of
F F of XYZ so you see this is a complete
analogy a single integral of a function
G will be the volume or area under the
graph of this function and a double
integral will be the volume a double
integral of a function in two variables
will be volume of something in three
dimensions under the graph and the
triple integral of a function f is a
hyper volume of the four dimensional
region under the graph of this function
so the you have to introduce an
additional variable U and say that the
graph is given by so you have a four
dimensional space let's call that X Y Z
and you and you write U is equal to f of
X Y G now of course we could not really
visualize it because we only can only
visualize three dimensions there is time
so you can think of a region in space
time if you want and the extra variable
U you can think of as time but still
it's kind of so if you think about you
can imagine this because you can just
count you can look at a certain region
in three dimensional space and you can
count time from certain point zero to
some other point which depends on X Y Z
so that would represent the kind of
region in space-time and what you're
calculating is the hyper volume of this
of this region now this is but still
it's a little bit disconcerting because
we don't really have good intuition for
full dimensional space so it is natural
to ask is it possible to give it a three
dimensional interpretation well we can
go back to the double integral and ask
the same question there we can ask what
if what if F capital the general
function we know that this integral can
be thought of as a treat as it is a
volume of the 3d object but can it also
be interpreted in terms of just two
dimensional geometry and the answer is
yes it is because if you think of this
function as a density function mass
density function and
we'll give you the total mass of the
lamina or some kind of a plate which
occupies this region right so this is
something which you discussed last week
the total mass is a double integral
right so in other words you are thinking
of you can think of this calculation
where the function is 1 you can think of
calculating the volume but you can also
think of it as calculating the mass but
in a special case when the density
function is 1 if the density function is
1 then calculating the mass is the same
as calculating the volume that's why we
get the volume but in general the
density function could be more
complicated your your object may not be
homogeneous it could have some heavier
parts and lighter parts and you want to
kind of average out all of them you want
to find the total mass and the total
mass would then be the integral of that
function of that density function so
from this perspective you don't have to
introduce an extra dimension if your
object is your object if you have a
double integral you have region D you
think of this function as a density
function and you simply think that
you're evaluating the mass of the of
this of an object occupying this region
where this function is a density
function right and likewise if you have
a three dimensional object which
occupies some region E you can think of
the triple integral table integral with
a general function f as the mass of that
object you see so that's that's the way
to interpret it so this is a total mass
so mass of a solid E with mass density
function f
any questions about this all right so
our last topic in this in this chapter
about integration is about general
coordinate systems and the general
change of variables we have already
discussed some new coordinate systems in
two and three dimensions spaces we have
talked about the polar coordinate system
and we talked about spherical coordinate
systems also cylindrical by political in
some sense it's not really a new
coordinate system it's really more of a
kind of cousin of the polar coordinates
so now we would like to talk more
systematically about different
coordinate systems in two and two
dimensional space you can also do it in
three dimensional space but we'll just
focus on the two dimensional space and
in 3d the conceptual is the same but
calculations are much more complicated
so we basically will mostly confine
ourselves to the two-dimensional case
and as always when we talk about this
conceptual matters it's always good to
to look at a simple simplified version
which in this case would mean just
single integrals integrals in one
variable and see how things work for for
single single integrals so let's recall
how this works change of variables
change of variable variable in a single
integral f of X yes so we know how it
works we simply add we write X as a
function let's say G off of some new
variable you
and then what we do is we stop we
substitute this G of U instead of X in
the integral but in addition in addition
we realize the DX is not GU but rather
DX is G prime of you deal so what it
means is that it would be wrong to just
write the integral as F times D U but
instead there is this additional there
is this additional factor which is G
Prime so we recognize that even in
one-dimensional case there is this
additional factor and this factor
actually should be thought of as being
conceptually the same kind of object the
same kind of phenomenon as the factors
which we discussed in case of polar
coordinates name is the factor R and the
factor which we discussed in case of
spherical coordinates last time which is
Rho squared sine Phi so these are all
brothers in some sense so they are all
the all appear for the same reason I
mean although this is a one-dimensional
case this is two dimension case this is
a three dimension case but all these
factors are essentially this kind of
distortion factors the area or volume
distortion factors which happen due to
the fact that we introduce a new
coordinate system so our task right now
then is to understand what exactly this
factor is in the case of a most general
coordinate change not only in one
dimensional case but in the case of two
and three variables and like I said
mostly two variables you see so we would
like to develop a formula is no change
of variables but for double integrals
that's what we like to do for which this
are the polar coordinate case will be
just a special special case so let's try
to let's try to figure this out see how
this works
so in the one-dimensional case we have a
given variable X and we have a new
variable U and we have we have a law
which allows us to express one of them
in terms of the other and that's the
formula x equals G of U but now we have
now we let's try to develop let's try to
think of something similar in r2 in r2
we have to given we're given variables
or coordinates x and y and we would like
to introduce a to new coordinates
suppose we introduced new coordinates
let's call them U and V so here's an
example here's an example polar
coordinates something we have learned
already V as this new coordinate system
is our old friend polar coordinate
system so here when we are our n theta
so when we do that we should be when we
say that we haven't we have introduced
the new coordinate system what do we
mean by that we mean that we can express
each of the old coordinates x and y in
terms of this new coordinate in a
one-to-one way in a way that establishes
one-to-one correspondence between points
with XY coordinates and points with UV
or our theta coordinates in the case of
polar coordinates we know that those
formulas and we know that for every R
and theta where R is a positive number
and theta is between 0 and 2pi we have a
particular value of x Y and conversely
so it's a one-to-one correspondence
it's not sticky speaking correct what I
said because of a special point 0 the
origin point all the origin for which if
R is equal to 0 then theta is not
well-defined
so except for this one point this is
this flap which I would like to think I
would like to think of this formulas as
giving me a map a correspondence from
between two coordinate systems this is
our two physical coordinate system X Y
this is what we see this is the
blackboard and this is how we would
represent points on this blackboard and
here is a kind of a fake exam
the imaginary coordinate system which
coordinates ours R and theta our let me
write like this in fact many of you will
recognize that we have used it before
when we try to draw parametric curves in
polar coordinates we did use this an
important system so it doesn't it has
nothing to do immediately with the plane
because the way a point here will give
us a point on the plane is through this
formula but I would like to think of
this formula of giving us a map from
this axillary coordinate system this
imaginary coordinate system which we
have in our head which doesn't really
exist to the real coordinate system in
on the physical coordinate system on
this physical plane so for example let's
say I take the region where theta goes
from zero to PI and our goes from from
zero to one
this is a very simple region on this
imaginary plane right it's a rectangle
but what does it crisp on to in the
physical in the physical world what do
you think circle okay close we are warm
so the circle will come if we fix our if
we just look at this at this interval
this interval will correspond to the
part of the of the circle of radius one
which lies above the x axis because I
said from 0 to PI if I said from 0 to 2
pi it would be the entire circle but
because I said from 0 to PI it would be
half a circle right everyone agrees with
that
ok but that's not the entire region
right the entire region is composed not
just by this interval but also by all
other intervals which are which lie
beneath it right and so those intervals
will respond to circles of smaller
radius and so altogether here they give
me this rectangle but in the physical
world they give me this
two discs upper upper half of the disk
of radius one so you see it's something
very interesting happen under this
transformation we started out with with
the rectangle we ended up with upper
half of the disk and I would like to say
that this this formulas give me a
transformation information from this
region to this region what do I mean by
this I mean that any plate each point
here will correspond to a particular
point in here and in fact this
correspondence is one-to-one in other
words no two points will go to the same
point right and like I said this is
almost true unfortunate strictly
speaking it's not true for this for this
interval this interval this entire
interval where R is equal to zero will
go to this one point will go to this one
point so there is a there is a subtlety
but the point is that we are studying
here two dimensional region and and
something bad happens on this interval
which is one dimensional this is what
mathematician would call measure zero
it's not measurable it has its measure
isn't is negligibly small it's actually
zero so as far as computation of
integrals is concerned it's not going to
change anything
okay but if I want it to be if I want it
to be more more precise I would take say
it's not this rectangle where R goes
from 0 to 1 but I could instead take a
rectangle where R goes from 1/2 to 1
right then I would get instead of upper
half of the disk I would get upper half
of the annulus with the with the shorter
radius 1/2 and the longer larger radius
1 so if I do that actually it because
there are victories because it becomes
this information becomes less mysterious
you can certainly believe that I can
transform this strip into this what I do
by kind of
I kind of twisted that's what this
information given by this to form Oh
does it kind of twists and may expand
and stretches in certain certain very
controlled way the fabric of this
original domain to create a domain in
the physical world that's what this
information is and then if you think
about the big one it's sort of if you
get closer and closer to this red to
this red part it becomes closer the way
the way I stretch it is I stretch it on
this side in the same way but I stretch
it on the low on the low on the lower
side not stretch but in fact squeeze to
make it shorter and shorter and shorter
and as I approach here actually the
whole thing opens up into half of the
disk you see what I mean you guys see
what I mean yeah okay so so this is
exactly the kind of formulas I'm talking
about this is the one-to-one
transformation one to one so each point
here corresponds to point here and
conversely each point here corresponds
to one and only one point here when I'm
in this situation I would like to be
able to write a double integral of a
given function f of X Y da as an
integral with respect to U and V and of
course so I'm kind of in the same
situation as I was when I talked about
the one-dimensional case the first step
would be to substitute the formula for x
and y in terms of the new coordinates so
this would be let's say in general here
I have X as the front is R cosine theta
so it is some function of RN theta but
in general if I have a coordinate system
UV not necessarily polar but more
complicated I'll give you an example in
a minute over that of another change of
variables like this let's say this will
be some G of UV and this will be some
age
so the first step would be to just
substitute G of UV and hwv instead of
X&Y right and then just write the UDV
but this is not enough the point is that
there is always the resolve with an
additional factor there is always a
distortion factor here which we are not
going to calculate an example of this
factor is the factor R which we have
found in the case of polar coordinates
so for polar we get R and then we get
the r dc8 what we want to do is to have
a more conceptual way of deriving this
factor no just for put polar coordinate
system but for a more general coordinate
system UV x factor okay and of course
it's easier to explain having a
particular example in mind well here is
one example the polar coordinates but in
polar coordinates we have already
calculated what happened you have a
question yes you are you are asking
would this have the same area as this
and the answer is no hmm I'm sorry very
good point so it's a very good question
so when I say one to one doesn't it
already assume that it's going to have
the same area right and the answer is no
and and it's very easy to see that if
you have you know you buy a garment
which is which stretches you can see
immediately the answer right
unfortunately none of what I'm wearing
today can can do the trick but you can
imagine that you have something which is
which is stretchable maybe
oh okay let's just work with your
imagination you stretch it right a
stretch is the perfect I what this yeah
but my hands are I don't want to school
far so good
how can I get your no but if you're in
it okay so let's just use our imaginary
clothes clothes so okay so when you
stretch it stretch is a perfect example
over of a change of variables because
there is a one to one each pitch
particle we don't create any new
particles right clearly it's just each
point goes to a particular point and
it's one to one
it is like okay it's even easier to do
in one dimensional case you can stretch
an interval and make it you know just
say am i up X goes to 2x
just everything gets stretched by
factors to right so it is one to one but
when you stretch the area becomes bigger
right so just the fact that it's one to
one correspondence doesn't mean that the
area's stay the same and that's exactly
what we are fighting for this factor is
precisely the distortion factor for the
area but the point is which is maybe not
immediately obvious is that it would not
be a good idea to actually measure this
area and then measure this area and and
take the ratio of these two areas right
because but it would be okay if our
function which we were integrating
function f if we chose the function one
if we chose function one then we would
just we would just be calculating the
area itself and so if the area was
something before the area the two area
would be this and the area which which
we would naively think is correct in the
imaginary our theta coordinate system
would be something else and there will
be some distortion factor between them
right but that's not a good way to go
because you see the point when I make
this transformation the distortion
factor is not the same everywhere
because I explain for example that on
this guy this guy which is a look let's
look at this guy at the top in two
the top interval becomes the part of the
circle segment of a circle of radius 1
right where is this guy which has the
same length on the imaginary coordinate
system it becomes part of the circle of
radius 1/2 so short certainly this is
shorter than this
so our distortion is not like just
stretching but it's kind of stretching
in different way at different places so
what we need is the local distortion
factor you see the local distortion
factor which in other words we want to
see not how this area gets distort this
entire area gets distorted but we want
to see how this very small area around a
particular point gets distorted and
that's the local distortion factor and
that's exactly the factor which we will
put here
any other questions to see how this
works maybe it's better to sorry you
have a question now all right so I want
to give you another example of
coordinate change before we get to
before we get to calculating the fact
that just two so that we have a so that
we have sort of a better variety of of
examples
okay so so here's here's the second
example which is actually straight from
the book it's and this I want to use it
a kind of a motivation for everything we
are doing right now because perhaps for
you it's not so clear yet why we are
discussing this issue but well polar
coordinates is already a good
illustration because we know the sum of
the integrals become much simpler in
polar coordinates but here is another
example where the coordinate system of
choice is not polar coordinate system so
this is 15.9 number 20 and so let's say
you need to calculate this integral over
some region D where D is described as
follows G is bounded by lines X minus y
0 X minus y equals 2x plus y 0 and X
plus y Cosi
so this is X this is X plus y equals
zero this is X minus y equals zero this
is X plus y equals 2 or X minus y equals
2 this is negative 2 and then there is
another one which goes to this is 3 so
it is actually it is actually a
rectangle because these two planes are
parallel
well my picture is not so great but it
should be parallel and this two should
be parallel also right so it is actually
rectangle but it's a rectangle which is
rotated so first of all if you try to do
this integral in a usual way by
projecting onto that line or projecting
onto the wild line it's going to be
difficult because you see that first we
have to break it into pieces and then
you know the bounds will be will be
functions will be some not very
complicated like linear functions but
then you look at the integrand and you
see that it's going to really look awful
if you try to do this ok so what this
picture immediately suggests is that we
should try to find another coordinate
system in which this integral will
simplify and what is this coordinate
system well what if I told you that
instead of calculating this integral
you would have to calculate the integral
of U times e to the I want to see V V
times u times v g UD where of over some
region G prime where D prime would be
simply
you going from so the you going from
zero to two into it it's like a
different way but also be rectangle but
this rectangle would be turned in the
right direction
so this would be this would be U and V
and this would be two and three you see
this surely is much easier to calculate
right because this is immediately breaks
into iterated integrals and you find the
answer right away so what have I done so
what what how can I get from this
integral to this integral I simply
introduce new variables U and V where u
is is X minus is X minus y and V is X
plus y right if I do that that my bounds
which were X minus y equals 0 and become
just bound u equal 0 and u equal to
right which is what I did here from 0 to
2 and also V from 0 to 3 which is what I
did here so the region simplified it
becomes kind of turn it return it so
that it really stands straight like this
and found that the function simplifies
as well because X plus y becomes V and x
squared minus y squared I can write as X
minus y times X plus y which is U times
V right but it is not true that this
integral is equal to this integral
because as I said there has to be some
factor which is introduced some factor
introduced here and to understand what
why this would introduce this factor
it's very easy to just to look at the
map the transformation so we have here
we have here this rectangle in UV
coordinate system you see this is an
example of this kind of transformation
but it's simpler because it's linear and
those of you who have taken
maybe our taking math 54 will recognize
a linear transformation in fact this
rotation by 45 degrees
coupled with with an expansion by square
root of 2 so so this is 2 and this is 3
and there is this formula give me a map
because actually here I have expressed U
and V in terms of x and y but I can also
go back and I can express x and y in
terms of U and V and I will find that X
U plus V over 2 how to find this well
this is U and this is V take the sum
when you take the Sun the Y's will get
cancelled and you'll get 2x so if you
divide by 2 you will get X and likewise
y is equal to a negative u plus V
divided by 2 right so that's this map
each point here will correspond to a
particular point here but now Why Why
should there be a factor a magnifying
factor or distortion factor it looks
like well this is the react angle this
is rectangle perhaps we can just get
away without any factor this is actually
easy to find out because in this case
the stretching the stretching that
occurs is actually homogeneous there is
the same distortion factor or stretching
factor everywhere across the entire
region unlike this case so in this case
the stretching factor is actually R so
it does depend on the variables on the
polar coordinates R and theta in this
case is going to be constant and so to
find out what it is we could actually
look at this globally and we can just
in other words assume that suppose that
instead of this function I would just
take function 1 let's suppose I took
take function 1 instead of this if I
take the function 1 what I'm calculating
is just the area of this guy right and
this area is very easy to calculate
in fact because well you just have to
use the pythagoras theorem right so the
point is that here you have 3 right and
so then you can find what this is this
is a this is the right rectangle and
this has put 5 degrees this put 5
degrees in this 45 degrees or
pi over 4 so this length is equal to
this length divided by square root of 2
so this is 3 divided by square root of 2
we use yellow this is 3 divided by
square root of 2 and this this comes
from a triangle same kind of triangle
but now the long side is 2 so this is
going to be square root of 2 2 divided
by square root of 2 maybe so the area of
this guy the area here the 2 and this is
the tool area in the physical world is 3
over square root of 2 times 2 divided by
square root of 2 which is 3 but the area
of this guy and that's the imaginary
world because we are using coordinates
which are plural has nothing to do with
the real world we are using them for
convenience in order to be able to
evaluate the integral the area here is 2
times 3 through 6
so you see what happened here is that
the true area if we were calculating the
integral with the function f equal 1
instead of this complicated function we
would get the answer we would get the
answer 3 this is a true area this is the
2 area I'm just simplifying the question
questions calculate this function but if
the function were actually 1 we wouldn't
need to make any integral whatsoever we
would just need to calculate the area
which we can easily do by basic
trigonometry which I just did you get 3
but if you calculate it the way I am
suggesting now or you put the UDV over
this in this imaginary region D prime
you get 6 now these is not equal to 6
right that's why that's how you know
that there is a factor
and now we know that this factor is
actually 1/2 so it's actually the
stretching factor but it's shrinking
it's really shrinking factor instead of
stretching factor and we know that
indeed it has shrunk when we made the
transformation this guy has shrunk by a
factor by a factor of 2 if you count the
area
I mean it's linked linear sizes have
shrunk by square root of 2 so that the
area which is the product of two sides
shrunk by a factor of 2 you see so in
this particular case because the
transformation is linear the shrinking
factor actually the constant is 1/2
in general it's going to depend on going
to depend on on the point where you are
making making the transformation and we
will see now the general formula for the
shrinking factor but I want to use this
example to illustrate that even in a
very simple situation supposedly where
you can actually draw this quite easily
and recognize it as a rectangle and so
on it is much easier to find this new
variable U and V which you can see we
kind of they leap in your eyes you see
right away what the appropriate
variables are because everything is
explained expressed in terms of X minus
y X plus y so why not use them as as a
new variable one when you do that the
only thing you need to remember is a
factor to put here and the factor
actually in this particular case you can
guess by measuring the areas and in fact
it turns out to be one half so the the
the upshot of the discussion is that
actually this integral is equal to this
integral which you can easily evaluate
and that's a very good illustration of
the power of this method of changes of
change variables ok but now we have to
address the question of how to calculate
this factor this factor this question
mark factor in in the most general case
[Applause]
so that we will obtain some universal
formula which will serve as both this
case this example list information as
well as that example of polar
coordinates and it will give us in this
case the distortion factor of one half
and it will give us in this case the
distortion factor of R which you have
already calculated before right so how
to find the distortion factor J well for
this we simply have to compare the areas
just the way I have compared here but
locally instead of globally you just
look at the areas on a very small scale
in a small neighborhood of a point in
other words instead of this whole thing
this whole image you know comparing the
area of the whole thing and this whole
thing and dividing you want to take the
area here where the sides are some Delta
U and Delta V so that this area would be
Delta u times Delta V and you want to
compare that to the area which you have
in the real world which is the which
will be the area of the of the little
piece of this region it is pointing to
this little rectangle so let's draw the
kind of a this general picture so we
will have a small rectangle here from
some u 0 to u 0 plus Delta U and here
from V 0 to V 0 plus Delta V and then
we'll take Delta U and Delta V to 0 so
as we did before and let's look at the
image of this of
sky under this transformation and it can
become bigger or it can become smaller
depending on what a transformation is so
I will draw it as if it becomes bigger
just so that is easier to draw but in
principle it doesn't have to become
bigger it could become smaller so in
general this rectangle is not going to
be a rectangle right because we know
that for example a coordinate system a
rectangle goes to the annulus or part of
the analyst so there is no reason to
expect that even a small rectangle will
go to rectangle it gets distorted in a
certain way and so it will become it
will sort of be close to rectangle but
it will not be quite the same as a
rectangle so so here is here's what it's
going to look like in general where what
do I mean by this picture I mean that
say this side goes to this side right
this side goes to this side kind of
distinguish between them and then let's
use a different color for the other side
for the vertical side so say this one
will go here and this one will go to the
logo here so that's what happens to this
rectangle under this transformation and
what we need to do is to calculate the
area of this guy it calculate the Delta
a the area of this guy the area here we
know it's Delta u times Delta V I will
have to calculate this area is as Delta
u times Delta V times the factor
and that's exactly what we need then
this will be the guy which will put the
factory which we'll put in the integral
so how to do this well here again we use
one of the methods which we developed
before namely cross-product we know that
areas can be calculated by using
cross-product so what we are going to do
is we're actually going to approximate
this I mean there's no way for us to
calculate this area exactly what we'll
do is we will shift it slightly
well deform it slightly to make it into
into a parallelogram by taking the drill
by by taking the tangent by taking the
tangent vectors here so the old idea
again is work is at work which is that
you're on a very small scale and we are
at a very small scale which is the point
on a very small scale you can actually
approximate smooth curves by by their
tangent lines and so the areas will be
will be very well approximated by the
areas enclosed by those tangent lines so
in this in the case at hand it simply
means that instead of this area of this
curvy region I will take the area of
this rectangle okay and so what is the
area of this rectangle so Delta a will
approximate by the area of the rectangle
and I don't want to get into too much
detail here so I will just give you the
answer if you want to trace all the
steps you can look in the book it is
explained in great detail but
basically basically if you need once you
talk about tangents want to talk about
tangent you talk about derivatives so
what you need to do is you need to take
derivatives of these functions you have
X G of u v and Y is H of U V and so what
you'll do is you will have R of U V
which will be G of U V to be like X
times I plus y times J which is G of U V
I plus h of u v J and this area of the
parallelogram will be approximately
equal to the following
the cross product will be the absolute
value the load the norm the length of
the cross product between R sub U of U 0
V 0 times Delta u & R sub V of u 0 V 0
times Delta u so why why it's exactly
this I will skip because I will not have
time to finish but I think you can see
clearly the basic idea something we've
learned before how do you how do you
find tangents you find tangent by taking
derivatives and so that since I have
replaced my rectangle so my curve kind
of curved rectangle by the straight so
my curve parallelogram by straight
parallelogram I use tangent lines
because I use tangent lines this vector
can be expressed in terms of partial
derivatives of our respect to U and V so
this is the first vector this is the
second vector and I take the cross
product
so if you want to know more how to get
this formula just look in the book it's
a very simple calculation but once you
get this you can calculate very very
quickly the cross product by using the
you know the methods which we've
developed we have this ijk and then
you're going to have d VG d u the the HD
u and then you'll have VG DV g GD sorry
DG d VV h TD and I have 0 0 and then you
have to take the absolute value of this
so this and so you see that the only
contribution will come from K and it
will be this determinant so it's G GD u
this guy times this guy v HD v- d HD u g
GG v right
so you see you take you have G and H
right you have this formulas so you kind
of you kind of know from the beginning
that you the distortion factor will be
given by some sort of derivative or some
combination of derivatives so it's sort
of natural because to think isn't
falling away you've got two functions in
two variables so you have four possible
derivatives you can you can take right
you can take two partial derivative of
this function two partial derivatives of
this function and then you have to
assemble them in some way into a
meaningful quantity and that's how we
assemble them we assemble them into this
2x2 matrix and we take its determinant
so it's a really combination of those
four partial derivatives it's very
special combination and what I claim is
that that's exactly the factor so the
factor used so the distortion factor
which are denoted by by this question
mark is equal to this GG v well let me
write it it's a little bit nicer to
actually write it like this
g-g-gee you but G's is like X right so I
can just write the FDU and then H is
like Y right so I have F use 0 UV and
why H of UV so DX D u dy D u DX d DV
dy DV so you kind of assemble them in
this way where this is like X goes along
the colons Y vertical Y along the second
column U is in first row and B in the
second row you can actually transpose
these two factors if you want you can
switch rows and calls it's the same so
in the book actually I think it's
written the other way but doesn't matter
and we will actually have a notation for
this it's like taking D of X Y over D of
UV and this is called the Jacobian of
this coordinate change okay and that's
the fact that what you need to introduce
that's the distortion factor because
that's the area you see that the area of
this parallelogram which approximates
the physical area of the image of this
guy of the sixth angle in the imaginary
space is equal to this factor times D
Delta u Delta V whereas here you have
Delta u Delta V so what what's the
difference what's the ratio between
these two the ratio is this factor and
we find it factor by using cross product
because that's how you find the areas of
parallelogram so you can appreciate
again the the kind of nice this is a
nice technical tool and then we end up
with this formula so let's see if indeed
we are going to get what is expected
what we had expected on different
grounds likely different grounds in the
two cases which we have discussed the
polar coordinates and the special and
the problem which we talked about the
integral we talked about
so in the case of I I made a slight
mistake here which I forgot to write
Delta u Delta G because you had the
factor of Delta U and the fact of Delta
V so I just pulled them out of the of
the cross-product
so they will appear here okay so let's
check suppose you you have R and theta
and you have G is R cosine theta and H R
sine theta so we have to take this
derivative respect to 2r right so we've
got cosine theta and then we take the
respect to theta so it's minus R sine
theta and then we've got here the roots
of this function with respect to R
that's sine theta and then the reach of
this function with respect to theta so
that's R cosine theta so we take this
this minus this s that R times the
cosine squared theta plus sine squared
theta which is R as expected
that's distortion factor we had found
earlier for the polar coordinate system
right and finally let's calculate
[Applause]
and finally let's calculate the the
other one so here we have x and y are
given by this formulas so what we need
to do is we need to take the derivative
of this of respect of the first function
respect to u so it's 1/2 with respect to
V 1/2 and the second function with
respect to u it's minus 1/2 respect to V
1/2 you calculate 1/4 plus 1/4 I promise
right so there is one important point
which I want to make and we will talk
which is that sometimes you'll get a
negative number so you always take the
absolute value the point is that we are
not keeping track of orientation here
which we should should have in other
words you could switch U and V for
example and this will make the two role
switch and if you roll switch the rows
you'll get a negative sign so in fact if
you if you're careless which we are kind
of careless you might get a positive or
negative answer so the cure for this is
you always put absolute value that's the
formula correct formula is always put
absolutely at the end so that the result
is positive all right so I'll see
enthusiasts